velox/docs/functions/spark/map.rst, before:

=============
Map Functions
=============

.. spark:function:: element_at(map(K,V), key) -> V

    Returns value for given ``key``, or ``NULL`` if the key is not contained in the map.

.. spark:function:: map(K, V, K, V, ...) -> map(K,V)

    Returns a map created using the given key/value pairs. If there is duplicate key, by default that
    key's value comes from last value for that key in the arguments.
    If configuration `throw_exception_on_duplicate_map_keys` is set true,
    throws exception for duplicate keys. Keys are not allowed to be null. ::

        SELECT map(1, 2, 3, 4); -- {1 -> 2, 3 -> 4}
        SELECT map(1, 2, 3, 4, 1, 5); -- {1 -> 5, 3 -> 4} (LAST_WIN behavior)
        SELECT map(1, 2, 3, 4, 1, 5); -- "Duplicate map key (1) was found" (EXCEPTION behavior)

        SELECT map(array(1, 2), array(3, 4)); -- {[1, 2] -> [3, 4]}

.. spark:function:: map_concat(map1(K,V), map2(K,V), ..., mapN(K,V)) -> map(K,V)

    Returns the union of all the given maps. If a key is found in multiple given maps,
    by default that key's value in the resulting map comes from the last one of those maps.
    If configuration `throw_exception_on_duplicate_map_keys` is set true, throws exception
    for duplicate keys. Allows single map input.  ::

        SELECT map_concat(map(1, 'a', 2, 'b'), map(3, 'c')); -- {1 -> 'a', 2 -> 'b', 3 -> 'c'}
        SELECT map_concat(map(1, 'a', 2, 'b'), map(3, NULL)); -- {1 -> 'a', 2 -> 'b', 3 -> NULL}
        SELECT map_concat(map(1, 'a', 2, 'b')); -- {1 -> 'a', 2 -> 'b'}
        SELECT map_concat(map(1, 'a', 2, 'b'), map(3, 'c', 2, 'd')); -- {1 -> 'a', 2 -> 'd', 3 -> 'c'} (LAST_WIN behavior)
        SELECT map_concat(map(1, 'a', 2, 'b'), map(3, 'c', 2, 'd')); --  "Duplicate map key 2 was found" (EXCEPTION behavior)

.. spark:function:: map_entries(map(K,V)) -> array(row(K,V))

    Returns an array of all entries in the given map. ::

        SELECT map_entries(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2], ARRAY['x', 'y'])); -- [ROW(1, 'x'), ROW(2, 'y')]

.. spark:function:: map_filter(map(K,V), func) -> map(K,V)

    Filters entries in a map using the function. ::

        SELECT map_filter(map(1, 0, 2, 2, 3, -1), (k, v) -> k > v); -- {1 -> 0, 3 -> -1}

.. spark:function:: map_from_arrays(array(K), array(V)) -> map(K,V)

    Creates a map with a pair of the given key/value arrays. All elements in keys should not be null.
    If key size != value size will throw exception that key and value must have the same length.::

        SELECT map_from_arrays(array(1.0, 3.0), array('2', '4')); -- {1.0 -> 2, 3.0 -> 4}

.. spark:function:: map_from_entries(array(struct(K,V))) -> map(K,V)

    Returns a map created from the given array of entries. Throws exception if duplicate key or NULL
    key is found. Returns NULL if NULL entry exists. ::

        SELECT map_from_entries(array(struct(1, 'a'), struct(2, 'null'))); -- {1 -> 'a', 2 -> 'null'}
        SELECT map_from_entries(array(struct(1, 'a'), null)); -- {null}
        SELECT map_from_entries(array(struct(null, 'a'))); -- "map key cannot be null"
        SELECT map_from_entries(array(struct(1, 'a'), struct(1, 'b'))); -- "Duplicate map keys (1) are not allowed"

.. spark:function:: map_keys(x(K,V)) -> array(K)

    Returns all the keys in the map ``x``.

.. spark:function:: map_values(x(K,V)) -> array(V)

    Returns all the values in the map ``x``.

.. spark:function:: map_zip_with(map(K,V1), map(K,V2), function(K,V1,V2,V3)) -> map(K,V3)

    Merges the two given maps into a single map by applying ``function`` to the pair of values with the same key.
    For keys only presented in one map, NULL will be passed as the value for the missing key. ::

        SELECT map_zip_with(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2, 3], ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c']), -- {1 -> ad, 2 -> be, 3 -> cf}
                            MAP(ARRAY[1, 2, 3], ARRAY['d', 'e', 'f']),
                            (k, v1, v2) -> concat(v1, v2));
        SELECT map_zip_with(MAP(ARRAY['k1', 'k2'], ARRAY[1, 2]), -- {k1 -> ROW(1, null), k2 -> ROW(2, 4), k3 -> ROW(null, 9)}
                            MAP(ARRAY['k2', 'k3'], ARRAY[4, 9]),
                            (k, v1, v2) -> (v1, v2));
        SELECT map_zip_with(MAP(ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c'], ARRAY[1, 8, 27]), -- {a -> a1, b -> b4, c -> c9}
                            MAP(ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c'], ARRAY[1, 2, 3]),
                            (k, v1, v2) -> k || CAST(v1/v2 AS VARCHAR));

.. spark:function:: size(map(K,V), legacySizeOfNull) -> integer
    :noindex:

    Returns the size of the input map. Returns null for null input if ``legacySizeOfNull``
    is set to false. Otherwise, returns -1 for null input. ::

        SELECT size(map(array(1, 2), array(3, 4)), true); -- 2
        SELECT size(NULL, true); -- -1
        SELECT size(NULL, false); -- NULL

Commit message:

feat: Add checked_element_at for Spark ANSI mode
Add checked_element_at that throws on array out-of-bounds access and
missing map keys, instead of returning null. For Spark ANSI mode support.

velox/docs/functions/spark/map.rst, after:

=============
Map Functions
=============

.. spark:function:: element_at(map(K,V), key) -> V

    Returns value for given ``key``, or ``NULL`` if the key is not contained in the map.

.. spark:function:: checked_element_at(map(K,V), key) -> V

    Returns value for given ``key``. Throws an error if the key is not contained in the map.
    Corresponds to Spark's ``element_at`` with ``spark.sql.ansi.enabled`` set to true.

.. spark:function:: map(K, V, K, V, ...) -> map(K,V)

    Returns a map created using the given key/value pairs. If there is duplicate key, by default that
    key's value comes from last value for that key in the arguments.
    If configuration `throw_exception_on_duplicate_map_keys` is set true,
    throws exception for duplicate keys. Keys are not allowed to be null. ::

        SELECT map(1, 2, 3, 4); -- {1 -> 2, 3 -> 4}
        SELECT map(1, 2, 3, 4, 1, 5); -- {1 -> 5, 3 -> 4} (LAST_WIN behavior)
        SELECT map(1, 2, 3, 4, 1, 5); -- "Duplicate map key (1) was found" (EXCEPTION behavior)

        SELECT map(array(1, 2), array(3, 4)); -- {[1, 2] -> [3, 4]}

.. spark:function:: map_concat(map1(K,V), map2(K,V), ..., mapN(K,V)) -> map(K,V)

    Returns the union of all the given maps. If a key is found in multiple given maps,
    by default that key's value in the resulting map comes from the last one of those maps.
    If configuration `throw_exception_on_duplicate_map_keys` is set true, throws exception
    for duplicate keys. Allows single map input.  ::

        SELECT map_concat(map(1, 'a', 2, 'b'), map(3, 'c')); -- {1 -> 'a', 2 -> 'b', 3 -> 'c'}
        SELECT map_concat(map(1, 'a', 2, 'b'), map(3, NULL)); -- {1 -> 'a', 2 -> 'b', 3 -> NULL}
        SELECT map_concat(map(1, 'a', 2, 'b')); -- {1 -> 'a', 2 -> 'b'}
        SELECT map_concat(map(1, 'a', 2, 'b'), map(3, 'c', 2, 'd')); -- {1 -> 'a', 2 -> 'd', 3 -> 'c'} (LAST_WIN behavior)
        SELECT map_concat(map(1, 'a', 2, 'b'), map(3, 'c', 2, 'd')); --  "Duplicate map key 2 was found" (EXCEPTION behavior)

.. spark:function:: map_entries(map(K,V)) -> array(row(K,V))

    Returns an array of all entries in the given map. ::

        SELECT map_entries(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2], ARRAY['x', 'y'])); -- [ROW(1, 'x'), ROW(2, 'y')]

.. spark:function:: map_filter(map(K,V), func) -> map(K,V)

    Filters entries in a map using the function. ::

        SELECT map_filter(map(1, 0, 2, 2, 3, -1), (k, v) -> k > v); -- {1 -> 0, 3 -> -1}

.. spark:function:: map_from_arrays(array(K), array(V)) -> map(K,V)

    Creates a map with a pair of the given key/value arrays. All elements in keys should not be null.
    If key size != value size will throw exception that key and value must have the same length.::

        SELECT map_from_arrays(array(1.0, 3.0), array('2', '4')); -- {1.0 -> 2, 3.0 -> 4}

.. spark:function:: map_from_entries(array(struct(K,V))) -> map(K,V)

    Returns a map created from the given array of entries. Throws exception if duplicate key or NULL
    key is found. Returns NULL if NULL entry exists. ::

        SELECT map_from_entries(array(struct(1, 'a'), struct(2, 'null'))); -- {1 -> 'a', 2 -> 'null'}
        SELECT map_from_entries(array(struct(1, 'a'), null)); -- {null}
        SELECT map_from_entries(array(struct(null, 'a'))); -- "map key cannot be null"
        SELECT map_from_entries(array(struct(1, 'a'), struct(1, 'b'))); -- "Duplicate map keys (1) are not allowed"

.. spark:function:: map_keys(x(K,V)) -> array(K)

    Returns all the keys in the map ``x``.

.. spark:function:: map_values(x(K,V)) -> array(V)

    Returns all the values in the map ``x``.

.. spark:function:: map_zip_with(map(K,V1), map(K,V2), function(K,V1,V2,V3)) -> map(K,V3)

    Merges the two given maps into a single map by applying ``function`` to the pair of values with the same key.
    For keys only presented in one map, NULL will be passed as the value for the missing key. ::

        SELECT map_zip_with(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2, 3], ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c']), -- {1 -> ad, 2 -> be, 3 -> cf}
                            MAP(ARRAY[1, 2, 3], ARRAY['d', 'e', 'f']),
                            (k, v1, v2) -> concat(v1, v2));
        SELECT map_zip_with(MAP(ARRAY['k1', 'k2'], ARRAY[1, 2]), -- {k1 -> ROW(1, null), k2 -> ROW(2, 4), k3 -> ROW(null, 9)}
                            MAP(ARRAY['k2', 'k3'], ARRAY[4, 9]),
                            (k, v1, v2) -> (v1, v2));
        SELECT map_zip_with(MAP(ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c'], ARRAY[1, 8, 27]), -- {a -> a1, b -> b4, c -> c9}
                            MAP(ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c'], ARRAY[1, 2, 3]),
                            (k, v1, v2) -> k || CAST(v1/v2 AS VARCHAR));

.. spark:function:: size(map(K,V), legacySizeOfNull) -> integer
    :noindex:

    Returns the size of the input map. Returns null for null input if ``legacySizeOfNull``
    is set to false. Otherwise, returns -1 for null input. ::

        SELECT size(map(array(1, 2), array(3, 4)), true); -- 2
        SELECT size(NULL, true); -- -1
        SELECT size(NULL, false); -- NULL
