****************
July 2022 Update
****************

Documentation
=============

* Add documentation for Presto related :doc:`/functions/json`.

Core Library
============

* Add `ApproxMostFrequentStreamSummary` that approximately computes the top frequent values from a large stream.
* Add support for cast from a JSON type value to ARRAYS or MAPS of JSON type values.
* Add Parquet writer implemented over Apache Arrow Parquet writer.
* Add NegatedBytesRange filter.
* Add PlanNode, PlanBuilder, registry support for Window operators.
* Add support for DECIMAL type Variant values.

Presto Functions
================

* Add :func:`array_sort`, :func:`combinations` functions.
* Add :func:`approx_most_frequent` aggregate function.
* Extend aggregate functions :func:`min_by`, :func:`max_by` to support VARCHAR.

Hive Connector
==============

* Add NegatedBigintRange filters support to DWRF reader.

Performance and Correctness
===========================

* Add q5, q10, q12, q14, q19, q22 to TPC-H benchmark.
* Optimize KLL sketch memory usage by allocating memory based on the number of elements retained.
* Optimize arithmetic operations that check for overflow by enabling a fast execution path.
* Optimize :func:`row_constructor` Presto function by removing redundant copy.
* Add benchmarks for NegatedBigintRange, NegatedBytesRange filters.
* Improve test coverage for various aggregate functions.
* Improve performance of MmapAllocator::allocate.
* Create nightly fuzzer run.

Debugging Experience
====================

* Add WindowNode::addDetails implementation.

Credits
=======

Aditi Pandit, Amit Dutta, Andrew Gallagher, Bikramjeet Vig, Chad Austin, Connor Devlin,
Daniel Ng, David Greenberg, Deepak Majeti, Ge Gao, Huameng Jiang, Ivan Morett,
Jialiang Tan, Jie1 Zhang, Jimmy Lu, Jonathan Mendoza, Karteek Murthy, Kevin Wilfong,
Kimberly Yang, Krishna Pai, Laith Sakka, Masha Basmanova, Michael Shang, Naresh Kumar,
Orri Erling, Orvid King, Pedro Eugenio Rocha Pedreira, PenghuiJiao, Pramod, Prasoon Telang,
Scott Wolchok, Victor Zverovich, Wei He, Xavier Deguillard, Xiaoxuan Meng, Yoav Helfman,
Zeyi (Rice) Fan, Zhenyuan Zhao, usurai, yingsu00