********************
June 2022 Update
********************

Documentation
=============

* Add documentation for :ref:`complex types writers<outputs-write>`.

Core Library
============

* Add support for IntervalDayTime type.
* Allow cast between Date type and Timestamp type.
* Add fast path to :func:`zip` when all Arrays are flat and the same size.
* Add GroupId operator.
* Support Decimal type signature and type calculation using flex/bison.
* Add NegatedBigintValuesUsingBitmask and NegatedBigintValuesUsingHashTable for Bigint types.
* Add support for running tasks on the caller's thread.
* Add limited ORC reader support.
* Support conversion of DuckDB Decimals to Velox Decimals, and Decimal constant null vector.
* Allow cast from JSON type to scalar types, Array type, and Map type.
* Allow running join queries on the caller's thread.
* Add q3 to TPC-H benchmark.
* Separate the user exception stack from the runtime exception stack trace collection control.

Presto Functions
================

* Add Presto Date +/- IntervalDayTime functions.
* Add aggregate function :func:`map_union`.
* Add :func:`degrees`, :func:`e`, and :func:`sha512` functions.

Connectors
==========

* Add hdfs read support to hive connector.
* Add utility to benchmark dataset generation speed for tpch connector.
* Add totalParts and partNumber to TpchSplit in tpch connector.

Performance and Correctness
===========================

* Optimize constant aggregation mask.
* VectorWriter<Varchar> is now up to 2X faster for some string functions.
* Exclude non-deterministic functions from common sub-expression elimination.
* Optimize Expr::isSpecialForm.
* Optimize BaseVector::isConstantEncoding.
* Make Dictionary Vectors load only selected rows.

Credits
=======

Adam Simpkins, Aditi Pandit, Amit Dutta, Behnam Robatmili, Chad Austin,
Connor Devlin, Daniel Ng, Dark Knight, Deepak Majeti, Denis Yaroshevskiy,
Huameng Jiang, Jake Jung, Jialiang Tan, Jie1 Zhang, Jimmy Lu, Karteek Murthy,
Katie Mancini, Ke Jia, Kevin Wilfong, Krishna Pai, Laith Sakka, Masha Basmanova,
Michael Shang, Mindaugas Rukas, Orri Erling, Patrick Stuedi, Paul Saab,
Pedro Eugenio Rocha Pedreira, Pramod Sathyanarayana, Sahana CB, Sergey Pershin,
Wei He, Xavier Deguillard, Xiaoxuan Meng, Yating Zhou, Yoav Helfman, Zeyi (Rice) Fan,
Zhenyuan Zhao, artem.malyshev, benitakbritto, frankobe, usurai, yingsu00, zhaozhenhui