velox/docs/functions/presto/map.rst, before:

===========================
Map Functions
===========================

.. function:: all_keys_match(x(K,V), function(K, boolean)) -> boolean

    Returns whether all keys of a map match the given predicate. Returns true if all the keys match the predicate (a special case is when the map is empty); false if one or more keys don’t match; NULL if the predicate function returns NULL for one or more keys and true for all other keys. ::

        SELECT all_keys_match(map(array['a', 'b', 'c'], array[1, 2, 3]), x -> length(x) = 1); -- true

.. function:: any_keys_match(x(K,V), function(K, boolean)) -> boolean

    Returns whether any keys of a map match the given predicate. Returns true if one or more keys match the predicate; false if none of the keys match (a special case is when the map is empty); NULL if the predicate function returns NULL for one or more keys and false for all other keys. ::

        SELECT any_keys_match(map(array['a', 'b', 'c'], array[1, 2, 3]), x -> x = 'a'); -- true

.. function:: any_values_match(x(K,V), function(V, boolean)) -> boolean

    Returns whether any values of a map matches the given predicate. Returns true if one or more values match the predicate; false if none of the values match (a special case is when the map is empty); NULL if the predicate function returns NULL for one or more values and false for all other values. ::

        SELECT ANY_VALUES_MATCH(map(ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c'], ARRAY[1, 2, 3]), x -> x = 1); -- true

.. function:: cardinality(x) -> bigint
    :noindex:

    Returns the cardinality (size) of the map ``x``.

.. function:: element_at(map(K,V), key) -> V
    :noindex:

    Returns value for given ``key``, or ``NULL`` if the key is not contained in the map.

.. function:: map() -> map<unknown, unknown>

    Returns an empty map. ::

        SELECT map(); -- {}

.. function:: map(array(K), array(V)) -> map(K,V)
   :noindex:

    Returns a map created using the given key/value arrays. Keys are not allowed to be null or to contain nulls.
    For REAL and DOUBLE, NaNs (Not-a-Number) are considered equal. ::

        SELECT map(ARRAY[1,3], ARRAY[2,4]); -- {1 -> 2, 3 -> 4}

    See also :func:`map_agg` for creating a map as an aggregation.

.. function:: map_append(map(K,V), array(K), array(V)) -> map(K,V)

    Returns a map with new key-value pairs appended to the input map. The new keys are provided in the first array parameter and corresponding values in the second array parameter.
    Keys and values arrays must have the same length. New keys must not already exist in the input map. Duplicate keys in the new keys array are not allowed.
    Null keys are ignored. Null values are preserved in the output map. For REAL and DOUBLE, NaNs (Not-a-Number) are considered equal. ::

        SELECT map_append(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2], ARRAY[10, 20]), ARRAY[3, 4], ARRAY[30, 40]); -- {1 -> 10, 2 -> 20, 3 -> 30, 4 -> 40}
        SELECT map_append(MAP(ARRAY['a', 'b'], ARRAY[1, 2]), ARRAY['c'], ARRAY[3]); -- {'a' -> 1, 'b' -> 2, 'c' -> 3}
        SELECT map_append(MAP(ARRAY[1], ARRAY[10]), ARRAY[2, null, 3], ARRAY[20, 30, 40]); -- {1 -> 10, 2 -> 20, 3 -> 40}
        SELECT map_append(MAP(ARRAY[1], ARRAY[10]), ARRAY[2, 3], ARRAY[null, 30]); -- {1 -> 10, 2 -> null, 3 -> 30}
        SELECT map_append(MAP(ARRAY[1], ARRAY[10]), ARRAY[], ARRAY[]); -- {1 -> 10}

.. function:: map_update(map(K,V), array(K), array(V)) -> map(K,V)

    Returns a map with values updated for the specified keys. If a key exists in the input map, its value is updated in place (preserving original order). If a key doesn't exist, it is added to the end of the map.
    Keys and values arrays must have the same length. Duplicate keys in the keys array are not allowed.
    Null keys are ignored. Null values are preserved in the output map. For REAL and DOUBLE, NaNs (Not-a-Number) are considered equal. ::

        SELECT map_update(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2, 3], ARRAY[10, 20, 30]), ARRAY[2, 4], ARRAY[200, 400]); -- {1 -> 10, 2 -> 200, 3 -> 30, 4 -> 400}
        SELECT map_update(MAP(ARRAY['a', 'b'], ARRAY[1, 2]), ARRAY['a', 'c'], ARRAY[100, 300]); -- {'a' -> 100, 'b' -> 2, 'c' -> 300}
        SELECT map_update(MAP(ARRAY[1], ARRAY[10]), ARRAY[1, 2], ARRAY[null, 20]); -- {1 -> null, 2 -> 20}
        SELECT map_update(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2], ARRAY[10, 20]), ARRAY[], ARRAY[]); -- {1 -> 10, 2 -> 20}

.. function:: map_concat(map1(K,V), map2(K,V), ..., mapN(K,V)) -> map(K,V)

   Returns the union of all the given maps. If a key is found in multiple given maps,
   that key's value in the resulting map comes from the last one of those maps.

.. function:: map_entries(map(K,V)) -> array(row(K,V))

    Returns an array of all entries in the given map. ::

        SELECT map_entries(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2], ARRAY['x', 'y'])); -- [ROW(1, 'x'), ROW(2, 'y')]

.. function:: map_filter(map(K,V), function(K,V,boolean)) -> map(K,V)

    Constructs a map from those entries of ``map`` for which ``function`` returns true::

        SELECT map_filter(MAP(ARRAY[], ARRAY[]), (k, v) -> true); -- {}
        SELECT map_filter(MAP(ARRAY[10, 20, 30], ARRAY['a', NULL, 'c']), (k, v) -> v IS NOT NULL); -- {10 -> a, 30 -> c}
        SELECT map_filter(MAP(ARRAY['k1', 'k2', 'k3'], ARRAY[20, 3, 15]), (k, v) -> v > 10); -- {k1 -> 20, k3 -> 15}

.. function:: map_from_entries(array(row(K, V))) -> map(K, V)

    Returns a map created from the given array of entries. Keys are not allowed to be null or to contain nulls. ::

        SELECT map_from_entries(ARRAY[(1, 'x'), (2, 'y')]); -- {1 -> 'x', 2 -> 'y'}

.. function:: map_normalize(map(varchar,double)) -> map(varchar,double)

    Returns the map with the same keys but all non-null values scaled proportionally
    so that the sum of values becomes 1. Map entries with null values remain unchanged.

    When total sum of non-null values is zero, null values remain null,
    zero, NaN, Infinity and -Infinity values become NaN,
    positive values become Infinity, negative values become -Infinity.::

        SELECT map_normalize(map(array['a', 'b', 'c'], array[1, 4, 5])); -- {a=0.1, b=0.4, c=0.5}
        SELECT map_normalize(map(array['a', 'b', 'c', 'd'], array[1, null, 4, 5])); -- {a=0.1, b=null, c=0.4, d=0.5}
        SELECT map_normalize(map(array['a', 'b', 'c'], array[1, 0, -1])); -- {a=Infinity, b=NaN, c=-Infinity}

.. function:: map_values_in_range(map(K,V), lower_bound, upper_bound) -> map(K,V)

    Returns a map containing only the entries from the input map whose values
    fall within the specified range [lower_bound, upper_bound] (inclusive).
    Entries with values less than lower_bound or greater than upper_bound are removed.
    Entries with null values are preserved in the output.
    V must be a numeric type (integer, bigint, real, or double). ::

        SELECT map_values_in_range(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2, 3, 4], ARRAY[10, 20, 30, 40]), 15, 35); -- {2 -> 20, 3 -> 30}
        SELECT map_values_in_range(MAP(ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c'], ARRAY[1.5, 2.5, 3.5]), 2.0, 3.0); -- {b -> 2.5}
        SELECT map_values_in_range(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2], ARRAY[null, 50]), 0, 100); -- {1 -> null, 2 -> 50}
        SELECT map_values_in_range(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2, 3], ARRAY[5, 50, 500]), 10, 100); -- {2 -> 50}

.. function:: map_remove_null_values(map(K,V)) -> map(K,V)

    Returns a map by removing all the keys in input map with null values. If input
    is null, output is null. If input map is empty, output map is empty.

        SELECT map_remove_null_values(MAP(ARRAY['ab', 'bc', 'cd'], ARRAY[null, null, null])); -- {}
        SELECT map_remove_null_values(MAP(ARRAY[], ARRAY[])); -- {}
        SELECT map_remove_null_values(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2, 3], ARRAY[3, 4, NULL])); -- {1=3, 2=4}
        SELECT map_remove_null_values(NULL); -- NULL

.. function:: remap_keys(map(K,V), array(K), array(K)) -> map(K,V)

      Returns a map with keys remapped according to the oldKeys and newKeys arrays.
      Unmapped keys remain unchanged. Values are preserved. Null keys are ignored. ::

          SELECT remap_keys(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2, 3], ARRAY[10, 20, 30]), ARRAY[1, 3], ARRAY[100, 300]); -- {100 -> 10, 2 -> 20, 300 -> 30}
          SELECT remap_keys(MAP(ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c'], ARRAY[1, 2, 3]), ARRAY['a', 'c'], ARRAY['alpha', 'charlie']); -- {alpha -> 1, b -> 2, charlie -> 3}
          SELECT remap_keys(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2, 3], ARRAY[10, null, 30]), ARRAY[1, 2], ARRAY[100, 200]); -- {100 -> 10, 200 -> null, 3 -> 30}
          SELECT remap_keys(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2], ARRAY[10, 20]), ARRAY[], ARRAY[]); -- {1 -> 10, 2 -> 20}

.. function:: map_subset(map(K,V), array(k)) -> map(K,V)

    Constructs a map from those entries of ``map`` for which the key is in the array given
    For keys containing REAL and DOUBLE, NANs (Not-a-Number) are considered equal. ::

        SELECT map_subset(MAP(ARRAY[1,2], ARRAY['a','b']), ARRAY[10]); -- {}
        SELECT map_subset(MAP(ARRAY[1,2], ARRAY['a','b']), ARRAY[1]); -- {1->'a'}
        SELECT map_subset(MAP(ARRAY[1,2], ARRAY['a','b']), ARRAY[1,3]); -- {1->'a'}
        SELECT map_subset(MAP(ARRAY[], ARRAY[]), ARRAY[1,2]); -- {}
        SELECT map_subset(MAP(ARRAY[], ARRAY[]), ARRAY[]); -- {}

.. function:: map_intersect(map(K,V), array(K)) -> map(K,V)

    Returns a map containing only the entries from the input map whose keys are present in the given array.
    This function is equivalent to map_subset. Null keys in the array are ignored.
    For keys containing REAL and DOUBLE, NANs (Not-a-Number) are considered equal. ::

        SELECT map_intersect(MAP(ARRAY[1,2,3], ARRAY['a','b','c']), ARRAY[1,3]); -- {1->'a', 3->'c'}
        SELECT map_intersect(MAP(ARRAY[1,2], ARRAY['a','b']), ARRAY[10]); -- {}
        SELECT map_intersect(MAP(ARRAY[1,2], ARRAY['a','b']), ARRAY[]); -- {}
        SELECT map_intersect(MAP(ARRAY[], ARRAY[]), ARRAY[1,2]); -- {}

.. function:: map_except(map(K,V), array(k)) -> map(K,V)

    Constructs a map from those entries of ``map`` for which the key is not in the array given.
    For keys containing REAL and DOUBLE, NANs (Not-a-Number) are considered equal. ::

        SELECT map_except(MAP(ARRAY[1,2], ARRAY['a','b']), ARRAY[10]); -- {1->'a', 2->'b'}
        SELECT map_except(MAP(ARRAY[1,2], ARRAY['a','b']), ARRAY[1]); -- {2->'b'}
        SELECT map_except(MAP(ARRAY[1,2], ARRAY['a','b']), ARRAY[1,3]); -- {2->'b'}
        SELECT map_except(MAP(ARRAY[1,2], ARRAY['a','b']), ARRAY[]); -- {1->'a', 2->'b'}
        SELECT map_except(MAP(ARRAY[], ARRAY[]), ARRAY[1,2]); -- {}

.. function:: map_keys_overlap(map(K,V), array(K)) -> boolean

    Returns true if any key in the map matches any element in the given array, false otherwise.
    Returns false if either the map or array is empty. Null keys in the array are ignored. ::

        SELECT map_keys_overlap(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2, 3], ARRAY[10, 20, 30]), ARRAY[1, 5]); -- true
        SELECT map_keys_overlap(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2, 3], ARRAY[10, 20, 30]), ARRAY[4, 5]); -- false
        SELECT map_keys_overlap(MAP(ARRAY['a', 'b'], ARRAY[1, 2]), ARRAY['a']); -- true
        SELECT map_keys_overlap(MAP(ARRAY[], ARRAY[]), ARRAY[1]); -- false

.. function:: map_top_n(map(K,V), n) -> map(K, V)

    Truncates map items. Keeps only the top N elements by value. Keys are used to break ties with the max key being chosen. Both keys and values should be orderable.

    ``n`` must be a non-negative BIGINT value.::

        SELECT map_top_n(map(ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c'], ARRAY[2, 3, 1]), 2) --- {'b' -> 3, 'a' -> 2}
        SELECT map_top_n(map(ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c'], ARRAY[NULL, 3, NULL]), 2) --- {'b' -> 3, 'c' -> NULL}

.. function:: map_trim_values(map(K, array(V)), n) -> map(K, array(V))

    Trims the value arrays in a map to a specified maximum size.
    This function is useful for optimizing memory usage and performance for large feature maps
    where the value arrays may grow unbounded.

    Returns a map where each value array is trimmed to at most n elements.
    If n is negative, returns the original map unchanged.
    If n is 0, returns a map where all values are empty arrays.
    If a value array has fewer than n elements, it is left unchanged.
    Null elements in the arrays are preserved in the output. ::

        SELECT map_trim_values(MAP(ARRAY['a', 'b'], ARRAY[ARRAY[1, 2, 3], ARRAY[4, 5, 6, 7]]), 2); -- {a -> [1, 2], b -> [4, 5]}
        SELECT map_trim_values(MAP(ARRAY['a'], ARRAY[ARRAY[1, 2]]), 5); -- {a -> [1, 2]}
        SELECT map_trim_values(MAP(ARRAY['a'], ARRAY[ARRAY[1, NULL, 3]]), 2); -- {a -> [1, NULL]}
        SELECT map_trim_values(MAP(ARRAY['a'], ARRAY[ARRAY[1, 2, 3]]), 0); -- {a -> []}
        SELECT map_trim_values(MAP(ARRAY['a'], ARRAY[ARRAY[1, 2, 3]]), -1); -- {a -> [1, 2, 3]}

.. function:: map_keys_by_top_n_values(map(K,V), n) -> array(K)

    Returns an array of the top N keys from a map. Keeps only the top N elements by value. Keys are used to break ties with the max key being chosen. Both keys and values should be orderable.

    ``n`` must be a non-negative BIGINT value.::

        SELECT map_keys_by_top_n_values(map(ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c'], ARRAY[2, 3, 1]), 2) --- ['b', 'a']
        SELECT map_keys_by_top_n_values(map(ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c'], ARRAY[NULL, 3, NULL]), 2) --- ['b', 'c']

.. function:: map_top_n_keys(map(K,V), n) -> array(K)

    Constructs an array of the top N keys. Keys should be orderable.

    ``n`` must be a non-negative BIGINT value.::

        SELECT map_top_n_keys(map(ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c'], ARRAY[1, 2, 3]), 2) --- ['c', 'b']
        SELECT map_top_n_keys(map(ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c'], ARRAY[1, 2, 3]), 0) --- []

.. function:: map_top_n_values(map(K,V), n) -> array(V)

    Returns top N values from a map, by sorting its values in descending order. Both keys and values should be orderable.

    ``n`` must be a non-negative BIGINT value.::

        SELECT map_top_n_values(map(ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c'], ARRAY[1, 2, 3]), 2) --- [3, 2]

.. function:: map_keys(x(K,V)) -> array(K)

    Returns all the keys in the map ``x``.

.. function:: map_values(x(K,V)) -> array(V)

    Returns all the values in the map ``x``.

.. function:: map_zip_with(map(K,V1), map(K,V2), function(K,V1,V2,V3)) -> map(K,V3)

    Merges the two given maps into a single map by applying ``function`` to the pair of values with the same key.
    For keys only presented in one map, NULL will be passed as the value for the missing key. ::

        SELECT map_zip_with(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2, 3], ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c']), -- {1 -> ad, 2 -> be, 3 -> cf}
                            MAP(ARRAY[1, 2, 3], ARRAY['d', 'e', 'f']),
                            (k, v1, v2) -> concat(v1, v2));
        SELECT map_zip_with(MAP(ARRAY['k1', 'k2'], ARRAY[1, 2]), -- {k1 -> ROW(1, null), k2 -> ROW(2, 4), k3 -> ROW(null, 9)}
                            MAP(ARRAY['k2', 'k3'], ARRAY[4, 9]),
                            (k, v1, v2) -> (v1, v2));
        SELECT map_zip_with(MAP(ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c'], ARRAY[1, 8, 27]), -- {a -> a1, b -> b4, c -> c9}
                            MAP(ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c'], ARRAY[1, 2, 3]),
                            (k, v1, v2) -> k || CAST(v1/v2 AS VARCHAR));

.. function:: multimap_from_entries(array(row(K,V))) -> map(K,array(V))

    Returns a multimap created from the given array of entries. Each key can be associated with multiple values. ::

        SELECT multimap_from_entries(ARRAY[(1, 'x'), (2, 'y'), (1, 'z')]); -- {1 -> ['x', 'z'], 2 -> ['y']}

.. function:: no_keys_match(x(K,V), function(K, boolean)) -> boolean

    Returns whether no keys of a map match the given predicate. Returns true if none of the keys match the predicate (a special case is when the map is empty); false if one or more keys match; NULL if the predicate function returns NULL for one or more keys and false for all other keys. ::

        SELECT no_keys_match(map(array['a', 'b', 'c'], array[1, 2, 3]), x -> x = 'd'); -- true

.. function:: no_values_match(x(K,V), function(V, boolean)) -> boolean

    Returns whether no values of a map match the given predicate. Returns true if none of the values match the predicate (a special case is when the map is empty); false if one or more values match; NULL if the predicate function returns NULL for one or more values and false for all other values. ::

        SELECT no_values_match(map(array['a', 'b', 'c'], array[1, 2, 3]), x -> x = 'd'); -- true

.. function:: subscript(map(K, V), key) -> V
   :noindex:

    Returns value for given ``key``. Return null if the key is not contained in the map.
    For REAL and DOUBLE, NaNs (Not-a-Number) are considered equal and can be used as keys.
    Corresponds to SQL subscript operator [].

    SELECT name_to_age_map['Bob'] AS bob_age;

.. function:: transform_keys(map(K1,V), function(K1,V,K2)) -> map(K2,V)

    Returns a map that applies ``function`` to each entry of ``map`` and transforms the keys::

        SELECT transform_keys(MAP(ARRAY[], ARRAY[]), (k, v) -> k + 1); -- {}
        SELECT transform_keys(MAP(ARRAY [1, 2, 3], ARRAY ['a', 'b', 'c']), (k, v) -> k + 1); -- {2 -> a, 3 -> b, 4 -> c}
        SELECT transform_keys(MAP(ARRAY ['a', 'b', 'c'], ARRAY [1, 2, 3]), (k, v) -> v * v); -- {1 -> 1, 4 -> 2, 9 -> 3}
        SELECT transform_keys(MAP(ARRAY ['a', 'b'], ARRAY [1, 2]), (k, v) -> k || CAST(v as VARCHAR)); -- {a1 -> 1, b2 -> 2}
        SELECT transform_keys(MAP(ARRAY [1, 2], ARRAY [1.0, 1.4]), -- {one -> 1.0, two -> 1.4}
                              (k, v) -> MAP(ARRAY[1, 2], ARRAY['one', 'two'])[k]);

.. function:: transform_values(map(K,V1), function(K,V1,V2)) -> map(K,V2)

    Returns a map that applies ``function`` to each entry of ``map`` and transforms the values::

        SELECT transform_values(MAP(ARRAY[], ARRAY[]), (k, v) -> v + 1); -- {}
        SELECT transform_values(MAP(ARRAY [1, 2, 3], ARRAY [10, 20, 30]), (k, v) -> v + k); -- {1 -> 11, 2 -> 22, 3 -> 33}
        SELECT transform_values(MAP(ARRAY [1, 2, 3], ARRAY ['a', 'b', 'c']), (k, v) -> k * k); -- {1 -> 1, 2 -> 4, 3 -> 9}
        SELECT transform_values(MAP(ARRAY ['a', 'b'], ARRAY [1, 2]), (k, v) -> k || CAST(v as VARCHAR)); -- {a -> a1, b -> b2}
        SELECT transform_values(MAP(ARRAY [1, 2], ARRAY [1.0, 1.4]), -- {1 -> one_1.0, 2 -> two_1.4}
                                (k, v) -> MAP(ARRAY[1, 2], ARRAY['one', 'two'])[k] || '_' || CAST(v AS VARCHAR));

Commit message:

top n implementation done with priorityQueue and refactored to use shared utility

velox/docs/functions/presto/map.rst, after:

===========================
Map Functions
===========================

.. function:: all_keys_match(x(K,V), function(K, boolean)) -> boolean

    Returns whether all keys of a map match the given predicate. Returns true if all the keys match the predicate (a special case is when the map is empty); false if one or more keys don’t match; NULL if the predicate function returns NULL for one or more keys and true for all other keys. ::

        SELECT all_keys_match(map(array['a', 'b', 'c'], array[1, 2, 3]), x -> length(x) = 1); -- true

.. function:: any_keys_match(x(K,V), function(K, boolean)) -> boolean

    Returns whether any keys of a map match the given predicate. Returns true if one or more keys match the predicate; false if none of the keys match (a special case is when the map is empty); NULL if the predicate function returns NULL for one or more keys and false for all other keys. ::

        SELECT any_keys_match(map(array['a', 'b', 'c'], array[1, 2, 3]), x -> x = 'a'); -- true

.. function:: any_values_match(x(K,V), function(V, boolean)) -> boolean

    Returns whether any values of a map matches the given predicate. Returns true if one or more values match the predicate; false if none of the values match (a special case is when the map is empty); NULL if the predicate function returns NULL for one or more values and false for all other values. ::

        SELECT ANY_VALUES_MATCH(map(ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c'], ARRAY[1, 2, 3]), x -> x = 1); -- true

.. function:: cardinality(x) -> bigint
    :noindex:

    Returns the cardinality (size) of the map ``x``.

.. function:: element_at(map(K,V), key) -> V
    :noindex:

    Returns value for given ``key``, or ``NULL`` if the key is not contained in the map.

.. function:: map() -> map<unknown, unknown>

    Returns an empty map. ::

        SELECT map(); -- {}

.. function:: map(array(K), array(V)) -> map(K,V)
   :noindex:

    Returns a map created using the given key/value arrays. Keys are not allowed to be null or to contain nulls.
    For REAL and DOUBLE, NaNs (Not-a-Number) are considered equal. ::

        SELECT map(ARRAY[1,3], ARRAY[2,4]); -- {1 -> 2, 3 -> 4}

    See also :func:`map_agg` for creating a map as an aggregation.

.. function:: map_append(map(K,V), array(K), array(V)) -> map(K,V)

    Returns a map with new key-value pairs appended to the input map. The new keys are provided in the first array parameter and corresponding values in the second array parameter.
    Keys and values arrays must have the same length. New keys must not already exist in the input map. Duplicate keys in the new keys array are not allowed.
    Null keys are ignored. Null values are preserved in the output map. For REAL and DOUBLE, NaNs (Not-a-Number) are considered equal. ::

        SELECT map_append(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2], ARRAY[10, 20]), ARRAY[3, 4], ARRAY[30, 40]); -- {1 -> 10, 2 -> 20, 3 -> 30, 4 -> 40}
        SELECT map_append(MAP(ARRAY['a', 'b'], ARRAY[1, 2]), ARRAY['c'], ARRAY[3]); -- {'a' -> 1, 'b' -> 2, 'c' -> 3}
        SELECT map_append(MAP(ARRAY[1], ARRAY[10]), ARRAY[2, null, 3], ARRAY[20, 30, 40]); -- {1 -> 10, 2 -> 20, 3 -> 40}
        SELECT map_append(MAP(ARRAY[1], ARRAY[10]), ARRAY[2, 3], ARRAY[null, 30]); -- {1 -> 10, 2 -> null, 3 -> 30}
        SELECT map_append(MAP(ARRAY[1], ARRAY[10]), ARRAY[], ARRAY[]); -- {1 -> 10}

.. function:: map_update(map(K,V), array(K), array(V)) -> map(K,V)

    Returns a map with values updated for the specified keys. If a key exists in the input map, its value is updated in place (preserving original order). If a key doesn't exist, it is added to the end of the map.
    Keys and values arrays must have the same length. Duplicate keys in the keys array are not allowed.
    Null keys are ignored. Null values are preserved in the output map. For REAL and DOUBLE, NaNs (Not-a-Number) are considered equal. ::

        SELECT map_update(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2, 3], ARRAY[10, 20, 30]), ARRAY[2, 4], ARRAY[200, 400]); -- {1 -> 10, 2 -> 200, 3 -> 30, 4 -> 400}
        SELECT map_update(MAP(ARRAY['a', 'b'], ARRAY[1, 2]), ARRAY['a', 'c'], ARRAY[100, 300]); -- {'a' -> 100, 'b' -> 2, 'c' -> 300}
        SELECT map_update(MAP(ARRAY[1], ARRAY[10]), ARRAY[1, 2], ARRAY[null, 20]); -- {1 -> null, 2 -> 20}
        SELECT map_update(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2], ARRAY[10, 20]), ARRAY[], ARRAY[]); -- {1 -> 10, 2 -> 20}

.. function:: map_concat(map1(K,V), map2(K,V), ..., mapN(K,V)) -> map(K,V)

   Returns the union of all the given maps. If a key is found in multiple given maps,
   that key's value in the resulting map comes from the last one of those maps.

.. function:: map_entries(map(K,V)) -> array(row(K,V))

    Returns an array of all entries in the given map. ::

        SELECT map_entries(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2], ARRAY['x', 'y'])); -- [ROW(1, 'x'), ROW(2, 'y')]

.. function:: map_filter(map(K,V), function(K,V,boolean)) -> map(K,V)

    Constructs a map from those entries of ``map`` for which ``function`` returns true::

        SELECT map_filter(MAP(ARRAY[], ARRAY[]), (k, v) -> true); -- {}
        SELECT map_filter(MAP(ARRAY[10, 20, 30], ARRAY['a', NULL, 'c']), (k, v) -> v IS NOT NULL); -- {10 -> a, 30 -> c}
        SELECT map_filter(MAP(ARRAY['k1', 'k2', 'k3'], ARRAY[20, 3, 15]), (k, v) -> v > 10); -- {k1 -> 20, k3 -> 15}

.. function:: map_from_entries(array(row(K, V))) -> map(K, V)

    Returns a map created from the given array of entries. Keys are not allowed to be null or to contain nulls. ::

        SELECT map_from_entries(ARRAY[(1, 'x'), (2, 'y')]); -- {1 -> 'x', 2 -> 'y'}

.. function:: map_normalize(map(varchar,double)) -> map(varchar,double)

    Returns the map with the same keys but all non-null values scaled proportionally
    so that the sum of values becomes 1. Map entries with null values remain unchanged.

    When total sum of non-null values is zero, null values remain null,
    zero, NaN, Infinity and -Infinity values become NaN,
    positive values become Infinity, negative values become -Infinity.::

        SELECT map_normalize(map(array['a', 'b', 'c'], array[1, 4, 5])); -- {a=0.1, b=0.4, c=0.5}
        SELECT map_normalize(map(array['a', 'b', 'c', 'd'], array[1, null, 4, 5])); -- {a=0.1, b=null, c=0.4, d=0.5}
        SELECT map_normalize(map(array['a', 'b', 'c'], array[1, 0, -1])); -- {a=Infinity, b=NaN, c=-Infinity}

.. function:: map_values_in_range(map(K,V), lower_bound, upper_bound) -> map(K,V)

    Returns a map containing only the entries from the input map whose values
    fall within the specified range [lower_bound, upper_bound] (inclusive).
    Entries with values less than lower_bound or greater than upper_bound are removed.
    Entries with null values are preserved in the output.
    V must be a numeric type (integer, bigint, real, or double). ::

        SELECT map_values_in_range(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2, 3, 4], ARRAY[10, 20, 30, 40]), 15, 35); -- {2 -> 20, 3 -> 30}
        SELECT map_values_in_range(MAP(ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c'], ARRAY[1.5, 2.5, 3.5]), 2.0, 3.0); -- {b -> 2.5}
        SELECT map_values_in_range(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2], ARRAY[null, 50]), 0, 100); -- {1 -> null, 2 -> 50}
        SELECT map_values_in_range(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2, 3], ARRAY[5, 50, 500]), 10, 100); -- {2 -> 50}

.. function:: map_remove_null_values(map(K,V)) -> map(K,V)

    Returns a map by removing all the keys in input map with null values. If input
    is null, output is null. If input map is empty, output map is empty.

        SELECT map_remove_null_values(MAP(ARRAY['ab', 'bc', 'cd'], ARRAY[null, null, null])); -- {}
        SELECT map_remove_null_values(MAP(ARRAY[], ARRAY[])); -- {}
        SELECT map_remove_null_values(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2, 3], ARRAY[3, 4, NULL])); -- {1=3, 2=4}
        SELECT map_remove_null_values(NULL); -- NULL

.. function:: remap_keys(map(K,V), array(K), array(K)) -> map(K,V)

      Returns a map with keys remapped according to the oldKeys and newKeys arrays.
      Unmapped keys remain unchanged. Values are preserved. Null keys are ignored. ::

          SELECT remap_keys(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2, 3], ARRAY[10, 20, 30]), ARRAY[1, 3], ARRAY[100, 300]); -- {100 -> 10, 2 -> 20, 300 -> 30}
          SELECT remap_keys(MAP(ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c'], ARRAY[1, 2, 3]), ARRAY['a', 'c'], ARRAY['alpha', 'charlie']); -- {alpha -> 1, b -> 2, charlie -> 3}
          SELECT remap_keys(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2, 3], ARRAY[10, null, 30]), ARRAY[1, 2], ARRAY[100, 200]); -- {100 -> 10, 200 -> null, 3 -> 30}
          SELECT remap_keys(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2], ARRAY[10, 20]), ARRAY[], ARRAY[]); -- {1 -> 10, 2 -> 20}

.. function:: map_subset(map(K,V), array(k)) -> map(K,V)

    Constructs a map from those entries of ``map`` for which the key is in the array given
    For keys containing REAL and DOUBLE, NANs (Not-a-Number) are considered equal. ::

        SELECT map_subset(MAP(ARRAY[1,2], ARRAY['a','b']), ARRAY[10]); -- {}
        SELECT map_subset(MAP(ARRAY[1,2], ARRAY['a','b']), ARRAY[1]); -- {1->'a'}
        SELECT map_subset(MAP(ARRAY[1,2], ARRAY['a','b']), ARRAY[1,3]); -- {1->'a'}
        SELECT map_subset(MAP(ARRAY[], ARRAY[]), ARRAY[1,2]); -- {}
        SELECT map_subset(MAP(ARRAY[], ARRAY[]), ARRAY[]); -- {}

.. function:: map_intersect(map(K,V), array(K)) -> map(K,V)

    Returns a map containing only the entries from the input map whose keys are present in the given array.
    This function is equivalent to map_subset. Null keys in the array are ignored.
    For keys containing REAL and DOUBLE, NANs (Not-a-Number) are considered equal. ::

        SELECT map_intersect(MAP(ARRAY[1,2,3], ARRAY['a','b','c']), ARRAY[1,3]); -- {1->'a', 3->'c'}
        SELECT map_intersect(MAP(ARRAY[1,2], ARRAY['a','b']), ARRAY[10]); -- {}
        SELECT map_intersect(MAP(ARRAY[1,2], ARRAY['a','b']), ARRAY[]); -- {}
        SELECT map_intersect(MAP(ARRAY[], ARRAY[]), ARRAY[1,2]); -- {}

.. function:: map_except(map(K,V), array(k)) -> map(K,V)

    Constructs a map from those entries of ``map`` for which the key is not in the array given.
    For keys containing REAL and DOUBLE, NANs (Not-a-Number) are considered equal. ::

        SELECT map_except(MAP(ARRAY[1,2], ARRAY['a','b']), ARRAY[10]); -- {1->'a', 2->'b'}
        SELECT map_except(MAP(ARRAY[1,2], ARRAY['a','b']), ARRAY[1]); -- {2->'b'}
        SELECT map_except(MAP(ARRAY[1,2], ARRAY['a','b']), ARRAY[1,3]); -- {2->'b'}
        SELECT map_except(MAP(ARRAY[1,2], ARRAY['a','b']), ARRAY[]); -- {1->'a', 2->'b'}
        SELECT map_except(MAP(ARRAY[], ARRAY[]), ARRAY[1,2]); -- {}

.. function:: map_keys_overlap(map(K,V), array(K)) -> boolean

    Returns true if any key in the map matches any element in the given array, false otherwise.
    Returns false if either the map or array is empty. Null keys in the array are ignored. ::

        SELECT map_keys_overlap(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2, 3], ARRAY[10, 20, 30]), ARRAY[1, 5]); -- true
        SELECT map_keys_overlap(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2, 3], ARRAY[10, 20, 30]), ARRAY[4, 5]); -- false
        SELECT map_keys_overlap(MAP(ARRAY['a', 'b'], ARRAY[1, 2]), ARRAY['a']); -- true
        SELECT map_keys_overlap(MAP(ARRAY[], ARRAY[]), ARRAY[1]); -- false

.. function:: map_top_n(map(K,V), n) -> map(K, V)

    Truncates map items. Keeps only the top N elements by value. Keys are used to break ties with the max key being chosen. Both keys and values should be orderable.

    ``n`` must be a non-negative BIGINT value.::

        SELECT map_top_n(map(ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c'], ARRAY[2, 3, 1]), 2) --- {'b' -> 3, 'a' -> 2}
        SELECT map_top_n(map(ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c'], ARRAY[NULL, 3, NULL]), 2) --- {'b' -> 3, 'c' -> NULL}

.. function:: map_trim_values(map(K, array(V)), n) -> map(K, array(V))

    Trims the value arrays in a map to a specified maximum size.
    This function is useful for optimizing memory usage and performance for large feature maps
    where the value arrays may grow unbounded.

    Returns a map where each value array is trimmed to at most n elements.
    If n is negative, returns the original map unchanged.
    If n is 0, returns a map where all values are empty arrays.
    If a value array has fewer than n elements, it is left unchanged.
    Null elements in the arrays are preserved in the output. ::

        SELECT map_trim_values(MAP(ARRAY['a', 'b'], ARRAY[ARRAY[1, 2, 3], ARRAY[4, 5, 6, 7]]), 2); -- {a -> [1, 2], b -> [4, 5]}
        SELECT map_trim_values(MAP(ARRAY['a'], ARRAY[ARRAY[1, 2]]), 5); -- {a -> [1, 2]}
        SELECT map_trim_values(MAP(ARRAY['a'], ARRAY[ARRAY[1, NULL, 3]]), 2); -- {a -> [1, NULL]}
        SELECT map_trim_values(MAP(ARRAY['a'], ARRAY[ARRAY[1, 2, 3]]), 0); -- {a -> []}
        SELECT map_trim_values(MAP(ARRAY['a'], ARRAY[ARRAY[1, 2, 3]]), -1); -- {a -> [1, 2, 3]}

.. function:: map_keys_by_top_n_values(map(K,V), n) -> array(K)

    Returns an array of the top N keys from a map. Keeps only the top N elements by value. Keys are used to break ties with the max key being chosen. Both keys and values should be orderable.

    ``n`` must be a non-negative BIGINT value.::

        SELECT map_keys_by_top_n_values(map(ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c'], ARRAY[2, 3, 1]), 2) --- ['b', 'a']
        SELECT map_keys_by_top_n_values(map(ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c'], ARRAY[NULL, 3, NULL]), 2) --- ['b', 'c']

.. function:: map_top_n_keys(map(K,V), n) -> array(K)

    Constructs an array of the top N keys. Keys should be orderable.

    ``n`` must be a non-negative BIGINT value.::

        SELECT map_top_n_keys(map(ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c'], ARRAY[1, 2, 3]), 2) --- ['c', 'b']
        SELECT map_top_n_keys(map(ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c'], ARRAY[1, 2, 3]), 0) --- []

.. function:: map_top_n_keys(map(K,V), n, function(K,V,U)) -> array(K)

    Returns the top N keys of the map sorted by the transform function in descending order.
    The lambda function is applied to each (key, value) pair and produces an orderable value of type U.
    Keys are then sorted based on these transformed values, and the top N keys are returned.
    U must be an orderable type. ``n`` must be a non-negative BIGINT value. ::

        SELECT map_top_n_keys(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2, 3], ARRAY[10, 20, 30]), 2, (k, v) -> k); -- [3, 2]
        SELECT map_top_n_keys(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2, 3], ARRAY[10, 20, 30]), 2, (k, v) -> v); -- [3, 2]
        SELECT map_top_n_keys(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2, 3], ARRAY[10, 20, 30]), 2, (k, v) -> -k); -- [1, 2]

    .. note::

        Due to a signature mismatch between the Java and C++ implementations, certain queries
        with lambda functions may fail when using Presto Java without sidecar mode enabled.
        For example, the following query will fail in Presto Java::

            SELECT map_top_n_keys(MAP(ARRAY['cat', 'leopard', 'mouse'], ARRAY[1, 2, 3]), 2, (k, v) -> length(k));
            -- Error: Unexpected parameters for function map_top_n_keys

        This query works correctly in Velox (C++) but requires sidecar mode to be enabled
        when running through Presto Java to delegate execution to the Velox engine.

.. function:: map_top_n_values(map(K,V), n) -> array(V)

    Returns top N values from a map, by sorting its values in descending order. Both keys and values should be orderable.

    ``n`` must be a non-negative BIGINT value.::

        SELECT map_top_n_values(map(ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c'], ARRAY[1, 2, 3]), 2) --- [3, 2]

.. function:: map_keys(x(K,V)) -> array(K)

    Returns all the keys in the map ``x``.

.. function:: map_values(x(K,V)) -> array(V)

    Returns all the values in the map ``x``.

.. function:: map_zip_with(map(K,V1), map(K,V2), function(K,V1,V2,V3)) -> map(K,V3)

    Merges the two given maps into a single map by applying ``function`` to the pair of values with the same key.
    For keys only presented in one map, NULL will be passed as the value for the missing key. ::

        SELECT map_zip_with(MAP(ARRAY[1, 2, 3], ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c']), -- {1 -> ad, 2 -> be, 3 -> cf}
                            MAP(ARRAY[1, 2, 3], ARRAY['d', 'e', 'f']),
                            (k, v1, v2) -> concat(v1, v2));
        SELECT map_zip_with(MAP(ARRAY['k1', 'k2'], ARRAY[1, 2]), -- {k1 -> ROW(1, null), k2 -> ROW(2, 4), k3 -> ROW(null, 9)}
                            MAP(ARRAY['k2', 'k3'], ARRAY[4, 9]),
                            (k, v1, v2) -> (v1, v2));
        SELECT map_zip_with(MAP(ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c'], ARRAY[1, 8, 27]), -- {a -> a1, b -> b4, c -> c9}
                            MAP(ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c'], ARRAY[1, 2, 3]),
                            (k, v1, v2) -> k || CAST(v1/v2 AS VARCHAR));

.. function:: multimap_from_entries(array(row(K,V))) -> map(K,array(V))

    Returns a multimap created from the given array of entries. Each key can be associated with multiple values. ::

        SELECT multimap_from_entries(ARRAY[(1, 'x'), (2, 'y'), (1, 'z')]); -- {1 -> ['x', 'z'], 2 -> ['y']}

.. function:: no_keys_match(x(K,V), function(K, boolean)) -> boolean

    Returns whether no keys of a map match the given predicate. Returns true if none of the keys match the predicate (a special case is when the map is empty); false if one or more keys match; NULL if the predicate function returns NULL for one or more keys and false for all other keys. ::

        SELECT no_keys_match(map(array['a', 'b', 'c'], array[1, 2, 3]), x -> x = 'd'); -- true

.. function:: no_values_match(x(K,V), function(V, boolean)) -> boolean

    Returns whether no values of a map match the given predicate. Returns true if none of the values match the predicate (a special case is when the map is empty); false if one or more values match; NULL if the predicate function returns NULL for one or more values and false for all other values. ::

        SELECT no_values_match(map(array['a', 'b', 'c'], array[1, 2, 3]), x -> x = 'd'); -- true

.. function:: subscript(map(K, V), key) -> V
   :noindex:

    Returns value for given ``key``. Return null if the key is not contained in the map.
    For REAL and DOUBLE, NaNs (Not-a-Number) are considered equal and can be used as keys.
    Corresponds to SQL subscript operator [].

    SELECT name_to_age_map['Bob'] AS bob_age;

.. function:: transform_keys(map(K1,V), function(K1,V,K2)) -> map(K2,V)

    Returns a map that applies ``function`` to each entry of ``map`` and transforms the keys::

        SELECT transform_keys(MAP(ARRAY[], ARRAY[]), (k, v) -> k + 1); -- {}
        SELECT transform_keys(MAP(ARRAY [1, 2, 3], ARRAY ['a', 'b', 'c']), (k, v) -> k + 1); -- {2 -> a, 3 -> b, 4 -> c}
        SELECT transform_keys(MAP(ARRAY ['a', 'b', 'c'], ARRAY [1, 2, 3]), (k, v) -> v * v); -- {1 -> 1, 4 -> 2, 9 -> 3}
        SELECT transform_keys(MAP(ARRAY ['a', 'b'], ARRAY [1, 2]), (k, v) -> k || CAST(v as VARCHAR)); -- {a1 -> 1, b2 -> 2}
        SELECT transform_keys(MAP(ARRAY [1, 2], ARRAY [1.0, 1.4]), -- {one -> 1.0, two -> 1.4}
                              (k, v) -> MAP(ARRAY[1, 2], ARRAY['one', 'two'])[k]);

.. function:: transform_values(map(K,V1), function(K,V1,V2)) -> map(K,V2)

    Returns a map that applies ``function`` to each entry of ``map`` and transforms the values::

        SELECT transform_values(MAP(ARRAY[], ARRAY[]), (k, v) -> v + 1); -- {}
        SELECT transform_values(MAP(ARRAY [1, 2, 3], ARRAY [10, 20, 30]), (k, v) -> v + k); -- {1 -> 11, 2 -> 22, 3 -> 33}
        SELECT transform_values(MAP(ARRAY [1, 2, 3], ARRAY ['a', 'b', 'c']), (k, v) -> k * k); -- {1 -> 1, 2 -> 4, 3 -> 9}
        SELECT transform_values(MAP(ARRAY ['a', 'b'], ARRAY [1, 2]), (k, v) -> k || CAST(v as VARCHAR)); -- {a -> a1, b -> b2}
        SELECT transform_values(MAP(ARRAY [1, 2], ARRAY [1.0, 1.4]), -- {1 -> one_1.0, 2 -> two_1.4}
                                (k, v) -> MAP(ARRAY[1, 2], ARRAY['one', 'two'])[k] || '_' || CAST(v AS VARCHAR));
